# Intro

## Welcome

The **Open Source Kit for Robotics** aims to provide real low level
access to a consumer grade robot in a way that's completely
unprecedented. In the past if you wanted to program a robot you've had
to choose between:

* Polished high-quality consumer grade electronics that may or may not
    provide limited exposure and APIs to program at the most superficial
    level.

* Home-brew projects running on hobbyist level hardware with simple
    programs of a few hundred lines of code to create interesting but
    simplistic behaviors.

Our goal at Digital Dream Labs is to eliminate these
trade-offs and provide you with direct access to:

* The internals of a robot with all the power of a smart phone.

* A state-of-the-art industrial strength codebase with hundreds of
    thousands lines of code.

* Sophisticated tools to debug and analyze code performance.

* Packaging tools to distribute your custom versions of the software
    to other robotics enthusiasts.

Please note that there will be some small changes due to contractual or legal requirements.
Review these changes **before** proceeding:

* It will not be possible to go back to a production robot. The unlock process is permanent.

* Amazon Alexa mode is disabled. Due to contractual requirements we are unable to include Alexa
 on Vectors where users can modify the system without review by Amazon.

We are excited as you are for this opportunity. We look forward to
seeing all the ways people will transform Vector and find completely
new uses that we couldn't even conceive or imagine. We feel no matter
how high we set our expectations someone out there will find ways to
surprise the world.

## Copyright

OSKR Owner's Manual (c) 2020 by Digital Dream Labs

OSKR Owner's Manual is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.

You should have received a copy of the license along with this
work. If not, see <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/>.

## Distribution Notes

This version of was written for OSKR software version 1.8.

The latest official version of this document can be found on the web
at <https://oskr.ddl.io/oom/>. A pdf version is also available at
<https://oskr.ddl.io/oom/oskrownersmanual.pdf>.

This document was generated by the [Sphinx Documentation
Generator](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/) and the original source is
available at <https://github.com/digital-dream-labs/oskr-owners-manual>.

