# Intro

## Copyright

OSKR Owner's Manual (c) 2020 by Digital Dream Labs

OSKR Owner's Manual is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.

You should have received a copy of the license along with this
work. If not, see <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/>.

## Distribution

The latest official version of this document can be found on the web
at <https://oskr.ddl.io/oom/>. A pdf version is also available at
<https://oskr.ddl.io/oom/osrkownersmanual.pdf>.

This document was generated by the [Sphinx Documentation
Generator](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/) and the original source is
available at <https://github.com/digital-dream-labs/oskr-owners-manual>.

## Welcome!



# Unlocking your Robot

The first step in your new adventure is unlocking your robot and
transforming it from a normal Vector to and OSKR enabled Vector where
you will be able to directly access all internals.

## What is Unlocking? Why do we do it?

By default the operating system of Vector is secure and unchangeable
with digital signatures to ensure system integrity. The security starts
with encryption keys baked in to the hardware itself and works its way
down to the final operating system image. In each phase of the boot
process the previous system verifies the next system loads. If even
one bit, byte, letter, etc change in any of the phases then the system
will stop loading and come to a halt. This is done for:

* **Security** We want to make sure a malicious user hasn't modified
    the code to do something that it shouldn't be doing, like sending spam
    emails. Even if a hacker or bot network is somehow able to access
    the Vector they won't be able to make any changes to turn it in to
    the wrong kind of bot.

* **Reliability** We don't want mistakes to break the device. There
    are currently hundreds of thousands of Vectors out there, and we're
    hoping for millions and billions. At that level even small
    problems can add up quickly. Ensuring the Operating System hasn't
    been changed ensures reliability.

At boot time the following verification happens.

1. The hardware chip itself verifies the cryptographic signature on
    the low level ABOOT partition. It is for all practical purposes
    impossible to override this check.

2. The ABOOT partition has another security key baked in that it uses
    to verify the BOOT partition and load it. The BOOT partition is a
    skeleton linux operating system to bootstrap the main system.

3. The BOOT partition loads the appropriate SYSTEM partition which is
    the final software to run.

    In the case of a normal Vector the
    SYSTEM partition is protected by an Android-specific system called
	`dm-verity` to ensure that this partition isn't modified.

    Development Vectors used internally by the company, and now OSKR
    Vectors do not enforce `dm-verity` security on the system
    partition allowing development of new features.

In addition to these layers of cryptographic security a new Vector
comes with a **recovery filesystem** installed for reliability
purposes. This has been loaded on at the factory and is the boot
system of last resort when no other software will load.

We then set aside two slots for day-to-day software usage called **A**
and **B**. When you install an OTA update the system:

1. Downloads the update.

2. Performs some basic verification to see if the image 'fits' with
    the current configuration.

3. Decides if the A or B slot is the available one.

4. Copies the new filesystems on to the slot.

5. Flags the new slot as the 'good' one.

6. Reboots and loads the software. If the software fails to load it
    marks the slot as invalid.

    If there is a previously valid slot, such as **A** after an update
    to **B** was installed, it reverts to that.

    If there is now good **A** or **B** slot it reverts back to the
    **recovery filesystem** so you can try to install again. This is
    important. No matter how bad the running system gets messed up we
    should **always** be able to fall back to the **recovery filesystem**
	
So what does all this mean? We've got two conflicting goals:

1. Normal Vectors should have all the security and reliability that
    are expected for a consumer electronic device and need to remain
    locked down.

2. OSKR Vectors should have some ability to lock down the software
    installed but some ability to modify software for development.

Because of this each type of robot need to enforce different
requirements each needs a different set of cryptographic signatures so
that a normal Vector behaves the way it should and a OSKR unit behaves
the way it should.

To accomplish this and unlock a OSKR robot we need to:

1. Reprogram the ABOOT image with a new cryptographic signature.

2. Sign the new BOOT images with this signature.

3. Create new **recovery filesystems** signed by the new keys because
    the old ones will be considered 'bad' when we swap out the signatures.

This is where things get tricky. The normal assumption is that the
ABOOT and recovery filesystems get installed directly at the factory
and physically written directly to the chips before final assembly of
the robot, and never touched again.

But to do this outside of the factory we need to do this with our OTA
(Over The Air) update scripts. And we need to modify software
partitions that were never expected to be written in an environment
much less reliable than a factory with physical connections to the
hardware. So we must be very careful to make sure that we generate
correct images, and the installation process completes without
interruption.

But enough of the theory let's dive in to the process...

## Step 1: Getting your QSN

The first step in unlocking your Vector is delivering the QSN to Digital Dream
Labs so we can make your custom unlock image. This is a serial number
that is included internally on the unit that is different from the ESN
which you see printed on the bottom of the robot.

To get the QSN:

1. Using the Chrome web browser go to <https://vector-setup.ddl.io>

2. Follow the instructions to pair with Vector and log in.

3. Click the **Download logs** link located at the top right corner of
    the page.

4. Open the downloaded archive which should extract the contents of
    several logs on to your hard drive.

5. Open the file `factory/log1`. It should look like this:

    ```
    total 13
    dr--r-----    3 888      888           1024 Jan  1  1970 .
    drwxr-xr-x    4 root     root          1024 Jan  1 00:00 ..
    dr--r-----    2 888      888           1024 Jan  1  1970 007084d8
    -r--r-----    1 888      888           1472 Jan  1  1970 AnkiRobotDeviceCert.pem
    -r--r-----    1 888      888           1704 Jan  1  1970 AnkiRobotDeviceKeys.pem
    -r--r-----    1 888      888            792 Jan  1  1970 Info007084d8.json
    QSN=324416252 # ESN=007084d8
    ```

6. Deliver the QSN and ESN from the last line of the file to Digital
    Dream Labs.

If you have trouble extracting the archive you can send the entire
.tar.bz2 file to Digital Dream Labs.

## Step 2: Doing a Test Upgrade

Remember that modifying the ABOOT and recovery filesystems are
dangerous operations. If the process is interrupted somehow it will
make it impossible to boot Vector. Some potential points of failure in
a normal OTA upgrade are:

* Vector loses power in the middle of the upgrade.

* Your wifi modem breaks or is unplugged in the process.

* Your service providers connection dies in the middle of the OTA file download.

* Some random part of the internet has issues preventing the OTA from
  downloading completely.

This doesn't matter for normal OTA installs because we can just try
again. But when unlocking an interruption like this can be
disastrous. To avoid the recommended procedure is to turn your Vector
in to an AP and connect directly with your computer. Now there are
only two devices that have potential for failure instead of
dozens.

The process to do this is somewhat cumbersome so it's best to do one
or more test runs until you're comfortable with the process and know
what to expect. we will do a normal OTA update with the same files
that are normally used to update your Vector. These do not interact
with the dangerous parts and if there are problems you can try again.

### Prepping the robot

The robot should be wiped before beginning.

### Hosting the OTA locally

We need to host the OTA locally on the computer we're using to update
since there will be no access to anything else at that point in time.

### Connecting to the advanced console interface in vector web setup

We need advanced access.

### Enabling AP mode and connecting

Do it.

### Starting the deploy

ota-start ...

## Step 3: Installing the unlock image

Now we follow the same procedure with the custom generated image for
your Vector. If you skipped ahead to here *please* go through the test
run with a safe file. Assuming you know what you're doing:

1. Start from an updated vector with updated software. The 0.9.0
    recovery software does not support updating the appropriate
    partitions and it will fail to try to install the unlock image.

    Don't worry, it does this safely and you will not damage your
    Vector if you forget to do so.

2.  Use a link to the new image instead of the normal OTA file.

After installation is complete Vector should reboot and you should now
see an introductory screen that says OSKR. This means that your
Vector is working and has the new security keys needed for OSKR
development.

## Step 4: Installing the OSKR image

Next we need to install an up-to-date software image to bring back all
the expected functionality. This is a **safe** update again. If there
are problems the Vector will continue to run. No need to be paranoid
on this update.

## Step 5: Getting your ssh key

Now that Vector is up and running and back to his normal self you'll
want to get the newly created SSH key. Although this isn't strictly
part of the unlock process this key is needed to access Vector's
internals and begin your OSKR adventure! So lets grab it now.

To get the QSN:

1. Using the Chrome web browser go to <https://vector-setup.ddl.io>

2. Follow the instructions to pair with Vector and log in.

3. Click the **Download logs** link located at the top right corner of
    the page.

4. Open the downloaded archive which should extract the contents of
    several logs on to your hard drive.

5.  The file `data/diagnostics/ssh/id_rsa` is your security key. It
    should be installed so it can be used by your system. On Linux and
    OSX:

    ```bash
    cp data/diagnostics/ssh/id_rsa_Victor-X1Y1 ~/.ssh
    chmod 700 ~/.ssh/id_rsa_Victor-X1Y1
	```

6. Load the key in to your keyring: `ssh-add
    ~/.ssh/id_rsa_Victor-X1Y1`

7. Obtain the IP of the robot from the diagnostics screen.

    * put Vector in charger.
    * double click the backpack button.
	* raise the forklift up and down

    You should now see the diagnostics screen which has the IP.

8. Connect! `ssh root@<ROBOT_IP_FROM_ABOVE>`

9. Type the command `exit` to leave the ssh session.

## Congratulations! Vector is unlocked!

# Filesystem layout

A brief overview follows of the filesystem as it exists at
runtime. This does not discuss the various partitions and slots used
to boot the robot.

## system partition

The system partition contains all the code and configuration to run
the underlying variant of the Android operating system and the
Userspace Anki code that powers Vector.

When you perform an upgrade of the Operating System the system
partition is completely overwritten and all changes are lost.

By default it is read-only and expected to be unmodifiable.

## /anki directory

This is not strictly a partition but it is where all of the Vector
specific code is located. Various services, utiilities, configuration
settings that are not relevant to the Operating System but to Vector
are located here. If you're trying to track down something that you
wouldn't expect to find on a normal Linux operating system it is
probably located here.

Inside you will see some familiar folders such as `/anki/etc/`
`/anki/bin` and others that follow the general configuration of a
Linux operating system as well as a `/data/` folder which holds
various thing that don't quite fit in with the normal file layout.

## /data partition

The `/data` partition is the only partition that is mounted read-write
on a production Vector. All user settings are saved here. When an
system upgrade is installed the data partition remains unmodified and
intact and all old data is available for use by the new version of the
Operating System.

This is where you will want to put any files, scripts, executables,
etc that you want to survive a system upgrade.

## Editing the system partition

Although the system partition is initially mounted read only it is
trivial to mount it in read-write mode since you are the root user. To
do so just run:

    mount -o remount,rw /

And you will now be able to edit the filesystem.

# Tools

## Text editors

To edit configuration files, change settings, etc, you'll find
yourself using a text editor to perform a variety of tasks. The
following text editors are installed by default. If you don't know
which one to use you probably want to start with **nano**.

* **nano** - The recommended editor for most users. Provides basic
    instructions on the screen.

* **vi** - A very low resource editor that operates in modal mode that
    is confusing to beginners. However it is available on the most
    minimal of server and embedded installs. It is useful to know the
    basics of vi as it will be installed on systems with no other editors.
	
* **mg** - A low footprint editor that mimics the basic keystrokes and
    opeations of the popular text editor emacs.
	
* **emacs** - Is not installed but aliased to the mg program for
    people who keep typing `emacs` out of muscle memory.

## logcat

## webViz

## self test

## das

## Offboard Vision Server
    http://192.168.1.111:8888/consolevarset?key=Offboard&value=1
    http://192.168.1.111:8888/consolevarset?key=MirrorMode&value=1
	coretech/vision/tools/offboard_vision_server/offboard_vision_server.py

# Vector subsystems

The Vector software consists of several interacting subsystems. The
internal codename for the project was *Victor** and we will see that
reflected in the naming with things like `vic-`.

As the software is open sourced there will be more detailed
descriptions of each component.

## vic-switchboard

This is the process that handles BLE communications and forwards them
to the rest of the system.

## vic-cloud

This is the subsystem that interacts with cloud services. Most
importantly this provides access to the voice recognition
functionality.

## vic-anim

This controls the animations that can be played on the robot. In this
case animations are a combination of motors moving and what the
display shows. If Vector is dancing and smiling all the work is
happening here.

## vic-gateway

The internet gateway which authenticates and routes SDK messages to
the vector.

## vic-engine

This is the most elaborate and powerful module by far. The engine
provides the high level functions for Vectors behavior, a complete AI
engine that controls his mood, and much much more.

## vic-dasmgr

This controls fleet logging via an ANKI developed system called DAS so
we can keep an eye on the health of all the robots out there in the wild.

# Security

By default the system comes in a somewhat locked down state that
prevents random access by most users to the internals. This section
describes several security features and settings, as well as ways to
modify the settings to fit your needs.

## BLE

All initial connections to Vector are made via BLE (BlueTooth Low
Energy) connections via the phone app, a client tool, Vector Web
Setup. These all require you to *pair* the device by entering a code
displayed on the Vector screen.

Due to the limited range of BlueTooth signals and the even more
limited range of being able to see the Vector's screen this does a
very good job of assuring that the person accessing the Vector is in
physical control of the device. Malicious users from around the world
simply can't interface with the Vector at this level.

## Securing SSH

By default the Vector generates a unique SSH user key the first time it
boots and every time you perform a User Data Reset.

SSH works by providing a *private key* that performs encryption
operations and a *public key* that allows another person or system to
verify the encryption operations. As the name indicates the *private
key* should only be given to someone who you want to be able sign in
to the computer and the *public key* is safe to distribute to anyone
without compromising the private key's security.

The default configuration is generally secure although you may wish to
take some steps to harden the ssh connection even more.

### Adding a passphrase to your local ssh key

By default the generated ssh key doesn't have a passphrase and anyone
with access to the file can use it. To add a passphrase:

```
ssh-keygen -p -f ~/.ssh/id_rsa-Vector-X1Y2
```

### Removing the private key from Vector

A user with physical access to Vector can get the private key. Once
you've retrieved a copy you no longer need to keep one on the Vector.
Removing the file will prevent a user from being able to download it.

```
ssh root@<ROBOT_IP>
root@Vector-U9D5:~# ls /data/ssh/                  
authorized_keys         id_rsa_Vector-U9D5      id_rsa_Vector-U9D5.pub
root@Vector-U9D5:~# rm /data/ssh/id_rsa_Vector-U9D5
root@Vector-U9D5:~# ls /data/ssh/
authorized_keys         id_rsa_Vector-U9D5.pub
```

If you do this you should backup your local copy of the key. If it is
lost you'll need to reset User Data to generate a new key and lose any
work on the `/data` partition.

### Changing authorized keys

## Unsecuring Development Tools

There are several development tools that live behind a firewall on the
robot as they allow any user with access to do a variety of things on
the robot. Since the tools were originally intended for use in a
development environment only they have lower levels of security than
is ideal.

### Temporary access via SSH Port Forwarding

ssh provides options to do *Port Forwarding* to create tunnels that go
from your computer, over the secure connection, to the system you're
logging in to. This can be used to get temporary access to a developer
tool. Although not as convenient as permenently changing firewall
rules, when you disconnect the ssh connection security is
automatically restored.

Example accessing the Anim process webViz server:

1. ssh in to the device with Port Forwarding options:

    ```
    grant@lord-humungus otas % ssh -L9889:localhost:8889 root@192.168.1.110
    root@Vector-U9D5:~# 
    ```
2. Visit <http://localhost:9889> on your computer.

Multiple ports can be forwarded. Here we forward two webViz
connections:

```
ssh  -L9888:localhost:8888 -L9889:localhost:8889  root@<ROBOT_IP>
```

### Permanent access via iptables

The firewall rules are contained in the files
`/etc/iptables/iptables.rules` and `/etc/iptables/ip6tables.rules`
Most users won't be running IPv6 will only need to edit the first
file.

The various exposed ports are already listed in the file but are
commented out so they are not loaded by default:

```
# adb-over-tcp
# -A INPUT -p tcp -m tcp -m tcp --dport 5555 -j ACCEPT

# rsync (dev-deployment)
# -A INPUT -p tcp -m tcp -m tcp --dport 1873 -j ACCEPT

# webots
# -A INPUT -p tcp -m tcp --dport 5103 -j ACCEPT
# -A INPUT -p udp -m udp --dport 5103 -j ACCEPT

# dev-webservices
# -A INPUT -p tcp -m tcp -m multiport --dports 8887,8888,8889,8890 -j ACCEPT

# wwise profiler
# -A INPUT -p tcp -m tcp -m multiport --dports 24024,24025,24026 -j ACCEPT
# -A INPUT -p udp --dport 24024 -j ACCEPT
```

To open up a resource permanently:

1. Mark the system filesystem as read/write. `mount -o remount,rw /`

1. Open the file `/etc/iptables/iptables.rules` in your editor of
choice.

2. delete the `#` sign comment from the applicable rule.

3. Restart iptables to load the rules: `systemctl restart iptables`

## Manifest signing keys

# Example Customization Tasks

## Disable Automatic updates

If you're making changes to the system partition you'll want to
disable automatic upgrades so you don't lose your work.

1. Examine logcat contents to see that we are trying to do updates
    every hour:
  
    ```
	root@Vector-U9D5:~# logcat update-engine:* *:S
	--------- beginning of main
	10-07 05:13:09.568  2214  2214 I update-engine: @robot.ota_download_start000025820
	10-07 05:13:10.637  2249  2249 I update-engine: @robot.ota_download_endfail1.7.1.68oskrFailed to open URL: HTTP Error 403: Forbidden20300026887
    ```

2. Examine the contents of the update file located at
    `/anki/etc/update-engine.env`

    ```
    root@Vector-U9D5:~# cat /anki/etc/update-engine.env 
    UPDATE_ENGINE_ENABLED=True
    UPDATE_ENGINE_ALLOW_DOWNGRADE=False
    UPDATE_ENGINE_BASE_URL=https://ota.global.anki-services.com/vic/prod/
    UPDATE_ENGINE_ANKIDEV_BASE_URL=https://ota.global.anki-dev-services.com/vic/master/lo8awreh23498sf/
	```

3. Note that the `UPDATE_ENGINE_ENABLED` is set to `True`.

4. Mount the system filesystem for editing: `mount -o remount,rw /`

5. Open `/anki/etc/update-engine.env` in your text editor of choice
    and change the value to `False`. Save and close.

6. Reboot to ensure changes take effect: `/sbin/rboot`

1. Examine logcat contents to verify we aren't doing updates automatically:
  
    ```
	root@Vector-U9D5:~# logcat update-engine:* *:S
	--------- beginning of main
    ```

    There are no longer entries from update-engine in the logs.

## Change Boot Animation

It's easy to replace the boot animation with one you like
better. You will need to convert an animated gif to raw format and
copy to the robot. For this you will need:

* A working installation of python with the Pillow package installed.

* An animated .gif with a resolution of 184x96 pixels

* The script `gif_to_raw.py` to convert the .gif to a raw image.

Both the script and a sample image called `bootscreen.gif` are located
in the github repository for this document under the
`examples/change_boot_anim` directory.

In this example we'll be operating on your HOST computer and doing
everything from there. We will not be issuing commands directly on the
robot.

1. Convert the .gif to a raw image:

    `python gif_to_raw.py bootscreen.gif`

    This will create a new file `bootscreen.gif.raw`

2. Mount the filesystem for writing. Here we'll do that from the host
    system:

    `ssh root@192.168.1.110 "mount -o remount,rw /"`

3. Use `scp` to copy the file in to place:

    `scp bootscreen.gif.raw
    root@192.168.1.110:/anki/data/assets/cozmo_resources/config/engine/animations/boot_anim.raw`

4. Reboot Vector from the host system:

    `ssh root@192.168.1.110 "mount -o remount,rw /"`

## Console vars via webVIz



# Appendices


